you can turn ordinary matches into
waterproof ones
apply a thin coat of nail polish to the
matches and let it dry
once they're ready they'll stay dry
enough to start a fire
even if you drop the matches in the
water if you get lost somewhere during
the winter and need a drink then
don't eat snow it has much more air than
water
so you won't even feel much more
hydrated your body also wastes a lot of
energy trying to eat it even worse you
might lower your body temperature and
could even get sick
if you find yourself face to face with a
coyote or a wolf
don't turn your back slowly retreat
while facing the animal
this might only work for a single animal
though if you meet a pack
then the most important thing is to make
sure that they don't surround you
back away towards a tree and pressure
back against it
then choose the right moment and climb
it as quickly as possible
several layers of clothing will warm you
better than one warm fur
coat or down jacket air will be trapped
between the clothing layers
insulating you and keeping your body
warm if you get lost in the woods
always try to sleep a little above the
ground you can lay on a layer of
branches and leaves as a makeshift bed
or stretch a hammock out between some
trees
at night the temperature drops and the
ground becomes cold
even if you build a fire it could go out
while you sleep
and the ground will be sapping your body
heat
you're in a boat in the middle of the
sea no food no fishing net and you're
hungry
it was supposed to be only a three hour
tour well guess what
you can catch fish with the help of
shoelaces and any object
phone watch or keys the shadow cast by
the boat in the sea
can attract fish and a reflective object
can work as bait
tie your keys to your shoelaces and use
them as a fishing rod
even if a fish doesn't bite activities
like this are a good way to maintain a
healthy mind on the open sea
a short meditation can save you from a
panic attack
you need to focus on your breathing and
try to slow it down
your brain will quickly calm down and
turn its focus away
from the panic oxygen mask and airplanes
work on the same principle
when you control your breathing your
attention is redirected away from
whatever bad thing is happening
you can make a torch out of a log put a
small log vertically
make a deep star-shaped cut on the top
put dry grass leaves and sticks inside
once you're done set fire to the log and
watch it burn for up to three hours
this should work the same regardless of
the size and type of wood
now if you meet an angry grizzly bear
never try to run away
because the bear can easily outrun you
instead
lie down and don't move grizzlies only
usually attack when they see a threat
so they'll often leave you alone if you
show them that you won't cause them any
problems
this only works with grizzly bears
though if a confrontation is
unavoidable back away slowly and use
bear spray
if you don't have any pepper spray will
work similarly
and should disorient the bear and scare
it away
or not don't eat berries or mushrooms in
the forest
if you don't know exactly what they are
they could be poisonous
if you have no other option eat the
inner bark of maples birches and pies to
fill your stomach
use a knife to cut away the rough outer
bark and get to the softer white stuff
you can boil it to make it even softer
or cook it over an open fire to make a
crunchy snack
and if you're really starving you can
look for ants
they might not be the most appetizing
but they're pretty nutritious
if you don't have a watch you can use
your fingers to find out how much time
is left until sunset
raise your hand so the inside of your
palm is facing you
your fingers should be between the sun
and the horizon line
see how many fingers can fit in this
space the thickness of one finger
equals about 15 minutes so you can
calculate the time left before sunset
if you're lost and need to build a fire
to attract attention
throw in a lot of pine cedar branches
columns
and any unnecessary rubber objects your
fire will emit more black smoke
which makes it visible from afar if you
have no water in the desert but have
some food
try to avoid eating for as long as you
can the more you eat the more thirsty
you'll get
the body needs liquid to digest food so
it'll use up what little you have
a person can live much longer without
food than without water
so don't be afraid to stay hungry hey
you found a huge puddle of dirty water
in the forest
if you're desperate for a drink you can
fill your bottle and filter it into
drinking water
to clean it make a rope of gauze or
clothing
put one end into the dirty bottle and
the other one into the empty one
before long the clean water will flow
into the empty bottle through the rope
while the impurities are left behind
before hiking replace your regular
shoelaces with paracord shoelaces
if you don't have enough rope these
laces can give you a few extra feet in a
pinch
if you're lost in the forest and have
nothing to warm you then take dry leaves
and grass from the ground
and put it between two layers of
clothing this will help you stay warm
for a long time
when you're lost in the desert try to
move as little as possible during the
day
find a shadow or create it from
improvised materials
and sit in the shade until dark at night
you'll spend much less energy
and use up less fluid while you walk
this will help you to avoid the risk of
a heat stroke
if you fall through some ice don't try
to get out like you would in a pool
if you put your hands on the ice and try
to push yourself out with your arms
it could crack and make you fall back
into the water
you need to stretch your arms parallel
to the ice surface
and stretch your legs way back so they
float in the water
in this horizontal position start waving
your legs as if you're swimming
move your arms carefully without putting
too much weight on the ice
and you should be able to escape if you
need to build a fire
while it's too windy here's what to do
dig two holes next to each other
and create a small underground tunnel
between them
make a fire in one of the pits the wind
can't extinguish it
and the fire gets its air through the
second pit this method is also useful if
you need to build a fire without drawing
attention
in the dark this kind of fire won't be
visible
don't throw away or pop bubble wrap take
it on a hike with you
it will protect you from the cold better
than even a thick blanket would
those tiny air bubbles are perfect
insulation
just put it in between layers of
clothing and it'll stop
any warmth from escaping the plastic
it's made of
is also waterproof so it can stop you
from getting wet too
swimming in the sea not far from the
shore you can easily get swept up in rip
currents
if this happens the most important thing
to remember
is not to swim against the current this
will only waste your strength and sap
your energy
and you're unlikely to ever overpower an
ocean current
instead try to swim sideways along the
shore
sooner or later you should get out of
the current and then you can safely swim
to the beach
[Music]
if you're stuck in a falling elevator
don't try to jump at the moment of
collision
don't take a sitting position or stand
either you need to lie
on the floor facing the ceiling spread
your legs as wide as possible
cover your face with one hand and put
the other hand behind your head for
protection
you reduce the pressure on your body in
this position when you fall
[Music]
you're lost a rescued helicopter flies
over the forest
but you don't have a flare and don't
have time to build a fire
use a small mirror or phone screen to
reflect the sunlight
aim the light beam towards the
helicopter rescuers should notice the
glare and fly over to save you